When Spanish Conquistadors arrived more than 500 years ago in the area that is now
Mexico, they encountered native people venerating the dead. During this annual ritual,
now known as Día delos Muertos, or Day of the Dead, natives believed that the souls of
deceased relatives returned to offer protection to the loved ones they left behind.

The Spaniards, who viewed death as the end of earthly life, believed the rite was
sacrilegious. They tried to eradicate the ritual during their attempts to convert the
natives to Catholicism, but their efforts were in vain. The natives, believing that life
continued after death, were hard-pressed to do away with a ritual that had been so
deeply woven into their culture for more than 3,000 years.

The Day of the Dead festival used to take place over one month's time during the ninth
month of the Aztec solar calendar, which coincides with August. Today it is celebrated
on November 2, a date chosen by the Spaniards in an effort to keep the festival
associated with the Christian holidays of All Saints Day and All Souls Day. The holiday
-- celebrated in Mexico, as well as in parts of the United States and Central and South
America-- is one example of how Mexican culture has been incorporated into the U.S.

The traditions associated with this day differ, depending on where it is celebrated. In
general, it is more of a cultural event in urban areas, and more of a religious one in rural
Mexican areas. Common to both is the practice of offering food and other objects to
deceased loved ones. In rural parts of Mexico, people spend the day in the cemeteries
where their relatives are buried. They bring ofrendas (offerings) such as flowers,toys
and food to place on the tombstones. Those who choose not to visit the cemeteries
often build altars, including food, flowers, prayer candles, and photos of the deceased,
in their homes. The use of the skull, one of the basic elements of the Aztec ritual,
continues to be incorporated into today's rituals. There are skull masks, chocolate- or
sugar-shaped skulls and skull-shaped pan de los muertos (sweetened bread).